[LOGO MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There's a deeper
mystery here,
and it's really the
mystery of consciousness.
And it's the mystery of
what we don't understand
about the nature of this
conscious experience
that we're living in.
There's this existential
wonder about what's
really going on here.
What's the meaning of life?
What happens when we die?
Why are we awake?
How is it that we're
aware that we're aware?
>> We've been asking for
millennia what is life.
Isn't that what we
all want to know?
What is life?
What is consciousness?
We answer one we find the other.
Consciousness is the
essence of life to me.
To think that at one point
there was this one first cell
and basically everything
that needed to be known
was in there.
Because from there,
everything else just emerged.
How did the one little cell
know how to become this?
You cannot not be in awe
of life in all its forms.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> My own personal goal before
I die is to understand how
consciousness fits
into the universe,
how it is compatible with the
laws of physics and biology
that have been so successful
at describing everything else
around it.
I had this magic
mushroom experience.
I was sitting here
just on the beach.
I was listening to minimalist
music, and the rays of the sun
were reflecting off the water.
And you had this fantastic
hallucination superimposed.
Everything slowed
down until I thought
I arrived at the center, the
beating heart of the universe.
And I finally understood,
understood how it all works.
But it's ineffable.
Afterwards, you have great
difficulty explaining it.
And so if you apply the cold,
sodden, wet blanket of reason,
you have to question yourself.
What did you experience,
and what does it reflect?
Does it really reflect
a different experience,
a fundamental different
aspect of the universe,
or is it just another intensely
pleasurable experience
produced by my brain?
The magic is that you
experience anything at all.
The magic is that
your brain, which
is a piece of physical
furniture like this boat
that a physical
object can feel, that
is the heart of the
mind body problem.
I'm dedicated to cortex.
It's what I have on my body.
Few scientists have that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Consciousness is any
experience, any feeling.
It feels like
something to be angry.
It feels like something
to remember something.
It feels like
something to see red.
Common to them all
is subjectivity.
I'm here to direct
this large institute
of 300 people focusing
on trying to understand
the cortex accelerating
neuroscience by building
these large observatories
to peer at the brain.
Hi.
Howdy, howdy.
>> How's it going?
>> Very well.
Mouse, human?
>> This is mouse.
>> We have this project
here at the Allen Institute.
It's a wiring layout of the
brain that involves taking
a tiny grain of brain matter,
literally 1 cubic millimeter,
so it's like quinoa, a grain of
quinoa, 1 by 1 by 1 millimeter,
cutting it into
30-nanometer thin slices--
25,000 of them-- at the
level of electron microscopy,
and then using modern
machine-learning techniques
where it can automatically
reconstruct the precise wiring.
Because in this piece
of quinoa grain,
there are roughly 50,000
cells, and there's
a few kilometers of wiring.
And once I understand which
neuron is wired to which,
I really understand a
whole lot more about what
makes this matter so special.
>> So those are mitochondria?
>> Yeah, it's all mitochondria.
This is a--
>> And that's a micrometer
of the-- half a micrometer.
>> This will be a micrometer
or something like that.
>> Can you go all the
way to layer one here?
>> Yeah.
>> How does layer one look?
Gosh, it looks
beautiful everywhere.
At this point, it is not
clear whether at this level
you can distinguish whether it's
a human brain or mouse brain.
And the point I would make that
the basic hardware of all of us
is the same.
Whether we are a
mouse or dog or monkey
or human or whale, at this
level, it's all very similar.
The brain is the
most highly organized
and complex piece of matter
in the known universe.
I always get a
shiver down my back.
Yeah, because he just sees
a vast untold complexity
upon complexity upon complexity.
And in each brain is
unique and different,
and you can go back
to a famous example
when it comes to consciousness
that Leibniz made in his mill
examples 350 years
ago because he said
you can never find
consciousness and even
if you go into a mill--
that was his analogy
at the time--
and you zoom in inside the
mill, you see not nothing
but levers moving.
And there are things in here
with respect to consciousness,
you go inside, you see,
well, where is consciousness.
I don't see consciousness.
I see synapses, and
I see mechanisms.
That was the point of Leibniz,
all of these mechanisms.
And somehow out of this
emerges consciousness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What is it about
this piece of goo--
of grey goo that gives rise
to the feeling of love?
Because if I look
at in physics, if I
look at the foundational
theories of physics,
quantum mechanics relativity,
there's no love there.
There's no experience.
There's no pain and pleasure.
If I look at the periodic
table of the elements,
again, there's no
consciousness in there.
There's no feelings and love
and hate and dreams and desires.
If I look at the endless
ATGC chat in my genes,
there isn't anything there.
But here every day, I open
my eyes in the morning
and have feelings of
love, of pain, of sadness.
And so the big question, the
heart of this ancient mind body
problem is really how you make--
how do you turn the
waters of the brain
into the wine of our
conscious experience.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CHATTER]
>> Consciousness is before
everything an experience.
I think most neuroscientists
who work on consciousness,
they know very well.
You could track to
the last neurons out
of 100 billion neurons, make
a complete map of everything
that takes place
when you see red
or feel anger or love, fine.
But unless you know
what experience
is by the first
person, it tells you
nothing about what it is
to be and to experience.
Nothing.
Zero.
[CLANGING]
Well, sometimes
people ask me you
scientist, I did a
PhD in cell genetics,
why suddenly you left
all that as seems
supposedly a promising career.
I don't know.
Might have been a
complete flop anyway.
Was going OK until
I finished my PhD
to become a Buddhist
practitioner first,
and then when I was 30,
I became a monk, yes.
Well, first of all, I didn't
slam the door on science.
I didn't left science
because for me science
is the rigorous
pursuit of knowledge.
I was trying to know
more about the mind
and what it is to
achieve in a freedom
from mental poisons,
different science.
After so many years, I'm
certainly not enlightened,
but I have a real clear
picture of how the mind works.
So I just changed the
field of application.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CHANTING]
We speak of a horizon that
cannot be reached is the idea
of studying consciousness
from the outside.
And from the inside,
there's no such problem
because they are not trying
to step out of consciousness.
You go so deep
within consciousness
that actually you can
experience pure consciousness,
the bare faculty to know.
There is something at the
depth of consciousness
that is pure awareness.
You can't get deeper than that.
Meditation aims at getting
an aspect of the mind that
is perfectly lucid,
perfectly clear where there
is no gap between
perception and reality
where you see phenomena as
appearing yet empty of reality,
as impermanent, as
interdependent where you see
beneath the movement
of thought is
pure, self-eliminating,
non-verbal awareness.
So that you require the
maximum clarity limpidity
of the mind like a blue
perfectly immaculate sky
is getting to the very
core of the basic nature
of consciousness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The key difference between
the Western way of looking
at consciousness and
the Buddhist way is that
they've primarily focused
on the inside view.
We by and large in the West
since particular Galileo,
Scientific Revolution,
we said let's remove
subjective from the world.
That was the step of Galileo,
and that gives rise to science
because let's just focus on
the objective things we can all
agree on.
I now realize as a
mature man much better
why I first became
interested as a scientist
to study consciousness.
And ultimately I
think my reason was
to rebel against this feeling
of cosmic indifference.
I felt that consciousness
ultimately could not
be explained by science.
I have two conflicting
impulses [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
Very much so.
So on the one hand, I was
very much a scientist.
I love science.
I love looking and
finding conformation
of order in the natural--
in the natural universe.
That's why I'm a scientist
ultimately because I
do believe that by
rational process,
we can understand what this
universe is made out of
and what we made out
of and why we're here.
On the other hand, I grew
up as a devout believer,
and I wanted to reconcile those
obviously conflicting things
and I wanted to reconcile them.
So on the one hand, I thought,
well, consciousness science
is going to not be able
to explain that finally,
and then finally I
have a justification
for why I believe in a soul.
But then as I did
it more and more
and thought about it
more and more, I said no.
This is-- I don't need a soul.
I don't need the classical
traditional religious Cartesian
soul.
I think you can explain
the strange aspect
of consciousness,
the subjectivity,
using physical natural laws.
You have to extend what
we know about the universe
a little bit.
But you can explain
consciousness
without removing this wonderful
aspect of consciousness
that it is a feeling.
It cannot just be reduced
to my neurons in my brain.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There are many possibly
infinite ways of approaching
consciousness just like in
the story with the blind men
and the elephant where everyone
had a different perspective
of what these elephant might be.
We have learned over
the last few decades
that under the ground, a
forest like these trees
will be connected and
will be talking right now,
probably whispering about
what I'm talking about.
The field of bioacoustics
is just at its infancy
and we still know
very little, but we
know the trees and plants are
not only able to detect sounds
from their environment but would
also produce their own sounds.
The incredible
amount of data that
is emerging in the
field of plant behavior
and communication is
obviously pointing
more uncomfortable questions
of whether plants are actually
sentient, intelligent,
conscious.
To be sentient means that
you are perceiving, sensing,
responding subjectively,
and there is the key word.
We have plenty of data to show
that plants perceive, sense,
respond, so they
definitely do that.
And the real question that
I often asked myself is
can do this in any other
way that is not subjective.
Because to do it
non subjective, it
means that you're doing it
objectively, which really means
that you are an object,
but objects don't feel,
don't perceive, don't respond.
[CHATTER]
The new lab that
I'm setting up here
at the University of Sydney,
it's called the BI Lab,
and it stands for
biological intelligence.
And really it's my little
smirk to the AI people
so artificial intelligence.
We are comfortable in
considering technology
as becoming intelligent
and even conscious.
We talk about robots
as if they are alive,
and yet we are not prepared
to talk about plants as
if they are alive.
It's definitely not
considering the question
of intelligence or consciousness
for these others worthy
of discussion.
My pea's out.
Oh, I can see the roots.
Excellent.
The plant is directing
the root into the channel
here, which is exactly the one
that is taken into the water.
So the previous experiment
with the peas looking for water
using sound was quite
straightforward.
The pea was growing
inside a maze,
which was the shape of
a letter Y upside down.
And when I just placed real
water at one end of the maze,
the pea grew its root straight
to it, which is not surprising
because they use the
humidity gradient to detect
the source of water.
Now I then did what we
do with animal studies
and design a
playback experiment,
so I actually recorded the
sound of water in the pipe
and I played it
back by attaching
a little speaker, a
vibration speaker,
in an iPod, which would play
back the sound of water.
And what I found is
that the peas would also
be able to find the source
of water through the sound
even when water really
is nowhere to be found.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Yeah.
>> That's touch.
>> OK.
>> So we're going
to set up the EPG,
which is the equivalent of
the EEG, for the little pea.
Oh, yeah.
There he is.
What are you doing?
>> I'm not touching it.
That's amazing.
>> Yeah.
>> I was a few centimeters away.
>> So I see you.
Again.
So one of the experiments I did
is testing Pavlovian learning
in plants, specifically peas,
and it's following pretty much
the same testing protocol
that we use in animals
and specifically the Pavlovian
protocol with the dog.
So in the case of Pavlov, he
used a bell, which was always
preceding the arrival of
dinner, and in response to that,
the dog will
salivate because it's
very excited about
the arrival of dinner.
But repeating these
long enough or times
enough, the bell on
his own, even when
there is no dinner coming,
will make the dog salivate.
Now plants don't salivate,
and I didn't use a bell.
But instead of a bell,
I used a little fan.
And instead of
dinner, I used light.
Now this is actually blue
light because the peas really
like that.
And what they do, a blue
light, they go towards it.
So they bend.
If you repeat
these enough times,
in this case for
three days, you will
find that the fan alone
without the light even arriving
will make the pea bend
in the right direction.
The fan didn't mean anything,
but the plant somehow
has learned the association
between these two,
and just like the dog, the
pea is passing the test
with flying colors.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My first experiment was
received with great resistance
because it was
really the first one
to show that, yeah,
plants can learn,
and they can tick all
the same boxes that we
would expect from an animal.
But a lot of the
comments that I received
were never about the
data, which is the--
that's the foundation
of science.
It's like nobody ever
actually said to me
you did this experiment wrong.
The data are no good.
It was always about
this cannot be.
There is the concept, even the
idea that a plant could learn,
it was almost disturbing.
So what is it about
brain and neurons
that is so special that without
them you can be conscious?
What brain and neurons
are really doing
is passing through signals
of electrical nature.
Well, plants are really good
at electrical signaling.
So does that mean the
plants are more conscious?
I think that they
have more genes that
are coding for that kind
of exchange of information
internally, so does
it mean that they
are even better than we are at
this consciousness business?
They are doing all
of the things that we
think you can only do if you
do have a brain in neurons,
but they're doing them?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CHANTING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Modern science seems to
be coming around in a circle.
The voices of plants that
the shamans have listened
to for millennia, we can record
them now in a lab with a laser.
A lot of my research
has been inspired
by knowledge that was shared
by Indigenous people with me,
and it was directly opened up by
the experience with the plants.
Often it comes through dreams,
and in a traditional Indigenous
knowledge perspective,
this is nothing unusual.
A lot of shamans get
their information
through the dream world, but for
a scientist to get information
from the dream
world looks weird.
It requires an opening up to
a space where intuition lives.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CHATTER]
>> When we launched our
first psilocybin study,
no such study had
been done for decades.
Psilocybin is the
active principle
in the so-called magic mushroom,
and it is a classic psychedelic
or a hallucinogen drug
used for thousands of years
by Indigenous cultures for
religious or divinitary
or healing purposes.
These drugs provide
a very unique window
into the nature
of consciousness.
>> The lights are super bright.
I'm seeing a metronome
keeping time, keeping track,
and as that metronome
swings up and down,
I'm bouncing
backwards into time.
There's a woman, a Native woman,
that I know I've encountered.
She has long dark hair
and I can see her face
and to me it looks
very familiar.
She knows me, and I know her.
I feel very peaceful
and not scared
like I'm being connected to
a collective knowledge base
and I'm learning about
myself and about what is.
These experiences
looked like experiences
that have been
reported over the ages
by mystics and
religious figures.
There's a sense of
unity of all people
and things, the sense that
everything is interconnected.
And that's accompanied by
a sense of deep reverence
for that experience.
Some people describe
it as homecoming.
There's something that they
knew to be true all along,
and it's a remembering.
And that's one of the
powerful pieces of the truth
value of this
experience when we say
it's more real and more
true than everyday waking
consciousness.
>> You ready for a few ratings?
>> Yes.
>> 0 not at all, 10 being
the strongest imaginable.
Distance from normal reality.
>> 6.
>> Pure being and
pure awareness.
>> 5.
>> Fusion of your personal
self into a larger whole.
>> 4.
>> Everything OK?
Warm enough?
>> Yeah, I'm warm enough.
>> OK.
You're doing
beautifully, Justine.
Seeing a little bit?
>> Yep.
>> OK.
She's doing great.
>> Great.
>> Yeah, look at it.
>> Pure being and
pure awareness, 5.
Fusion of your personal
self into a larger whole, 4.
Sense of reverence
or sacredness, 5.
8 for timelessness.
>> So, yeah, so we may have some
touch of a mystical experience
here.
>> We brought people back a
month later or two months later
and interviewed them.
We have anywhere from
70% to 80% of people
saying that this is in the
top five most meaningful
experiences of their life.
With respect to
spiritual significance
in our first study,
we had 30% of people
saying it was the single
most spiritually significant
experiences of
their entire life.
And when you'd ask, well,
what does that mean--
you're saying this is
in the top five, what
does that really mean to you--
people would look off and say
when my first child was born,
that changed my entire life.
My life would never be the same.
And my father recently passed
away, and that's hugely moving.
They'd say it's
kind of like that.
And so that's the metric
that they're using,
these huge experiences
that everyone has,
but this is occurring in
a single six-hour session
in a session room
at Johns Hopkins.
I have worked at Johns
Hopkins for over 40 years.
I work long hours and I work
more than five days a week,
and I can't say I've had one of
the most top five experiences
in my life there at Hopkins.
>> In one of my most
meaningful sessions that I had
in the study, I felt the energy
of people that have been close
to me to have passed away in
a way that it's maybe hard
to describe but it was very
convincing to me that it these
certain people.
So that's one way that it
really strengthened my belief
in the afterlife and whatever
that means whether that means
that your energy cannot be ever
destroyed and that's a part
of that connective thread
that is binding all of us
in the world, all
people end things.
I felt as though the
experience was preparing me
for things that I
know will happen
in my life that will be tough.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I'm being pushed on a
gurney down a hallway.
What I can see is ceiling tiles
going by very, very quickly
and industrial lights, and I
know that I'm in a hospital
and something is not right.
I could smell the
anesthetic hospital smell,
and things are very chaotic
around me, just commotion
and concern.
But all I can feel is safety
and the loving feeling that's
cradling me in that moment.
And I know I'm learning now for
an experience in the future,
that I'm being prepared
that when that happens,
when that moment
happens, I'll remember
this, remember that I'm
safe and it will be OK.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Since we began this work, we
have conducted research in over
600 psilocybin sessions.
>> Just recently our group
at Johns Hopkins and a group
at New York University
co-published studies in which
we administered a moderately
high dose of psilocybin
to cancer patients who met
clinical criteria for very
significant anxiety
or depression.
And most importantly, the
measures of depression
go markedly down, and
for the most part,
people felt much
more comfortable
with the prospect
of facing death.
And these effects
appear to endure.
People do not come out of
that experience saying,
oh, now I believe in heaven.
Now I believe in
life after death.
But it's not uncommon
for people to come out
entertaining in a
way that they perhaps
didn't previously that
there could possibly
be continuity of something.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> Sometimes when Western
visitors come here,
they expect that all our
young monks in the school will
meditate, but basically
meditation is not considered
to something for beginners.
You don't go to a
mindfulness course here.
Meditation means
cultivating in Sanskrit,
cultivating altruistic love,
loving kindness, compassion.
So it's not just sitting
there and looking in the sky
and emptying your mind.
Meditation actually comes
pretty late because it's
dealing with the basic
nature of your mind,
and if you are not prepared,
what are you going to do?
[CLANGING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When you see
the sacred dance,
the rituals are not
just magic rituals.
They are actually
guided meditation.
First there's a dance
to purify the ground
from all graspings
and mental clinging.
When you see a dancer with
a sword that cuts an effigy,
it's just cutting
the clinging to ego.
Grasping to the self could
be a source of hatred.
Obsessive craving,
arrogance, jealousy,
distortion of
reality, what would be
the result of that suffering?
So unless you deconstruct
the notion of ego,
those things will
continue to appear.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Meditation is the tried and
true course for understanding
the nature of mind, and
psilocybin is the crash course.
We often speak in
terms of ego and self
being dissolved acutely
by psilocybin and some
of these meditation practices.
But that's actually the
objective of most Buddhist
practices to recognize
that you are not the self
and that so often
in our cultures
that we've come to
identify ourselves
with that voice in our head
that says I'm going to get up.
I see the morning.
As one meditates more deeply,
it becomes very apparent
that sense of self
can drop away,
and that experience alone can
be totally transformative.
>> So we'll have this top over
your head like an antenna.
>> Hey, Jane Roland, just
wanted to know how you're doing
in there.
>> I'm doing great.
Thank you.
I feel pretty comfy.
>> OK.
That's what we want to hear.
>> It's like a spa.
>> One perspective on what
happens with psychedelics from
a neuroscience point of view is
the influence of psychedelics
on something called the
default mode network,
a function of brain that
underlies ego or sense of self.
People with clinical depression
have increased sense of ego,
and one of the things that
psychedelics do, psilocybin
and LSD, is to decrease
functioning default mode
network, in other words
decrease egoic function.
There can be a sense of the
melting away of a sense of self
or personality if you will
and emerging with something
greater than that.
So acutely you'll get
decreases in the sense of self
but concurrently a much greater
interconnectivity in the brain,
and the opportunity for
rewiring and new connections
forming is really
quite substantial.
One of the common features of
this decreased sense of self
is just a greater openness and
a greater freedom of choice.
And so that emerges
from psychedelics.
It emerges in meditation because
one of the characteristics
is an open mindedness and a
freedom from habitual response,
and it looks very
much like patterns
that we see in childhood before
those narratives get locked in
and that sense of
self gets locked in.
So this openness has huge
implications for healing.
>> I wouldn't hesitate a
second to say that the Hopkins
experiment was a completely
life-changing experience.
Why would something
synthesized by mushrooms
do something so dramatic
to the human brain?
And, in fact, what does it
do was the question in part,
and I participated
about 10 years ago
in a study which gave a small
number of subjects like me
various concentrations
of psilocybin
in a very controlled
environment in which we
were coached to be open to
whatever happened in our brain.
Ten years later, I
still regard it as--
in fact, even more so regarded
as the most significant
experience I've ever had.
At the time I did this,
I was in the more or less
immediate aftermath of
a really tragic death.
My son died by suicide.
He went through
different forms of drugs
from alcohol to ecstasy to
LSD to cocaine to heroin.
And one night I just
got a call that he
had shot himself to death.
My son's death had left
me so raw and so in need
of working through
certain things,
so I regarded the whole
psilocybin experiment
as at least potentially a way
to come to some further terms
with that.
I went into it with a
good deal of skepticism.
I wasn't in any certainly
not in any institutional way
religious nor really a
believer in much of any sense.
As a philosopher, as a
professor of philosophy,
I knew a lot about the
history of theology
but didn't feel a great deal
of personal participation in.
So I went into the whole
thing quite prepared
for a big zero on
the spiritual side.
Roland and Mary coached me a lot
regarding the whole experience
as a kind of space
traveler kind of astronaut
where you're going to get
blasted out into some possibly
scary place by yourself.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So, Rick, just began
by taking a couple of deep
breaths.
In and out.
And in and out.
>> It really felt like a journey
through some kind of cosmic
roller coaster, a deep sea
diver descending into the ocean
depths.
I even had the illusion
of pressure, a darkness.
And I was so gratified to
feel the touch of Mary's hand
although it felt as though she's
in some little boat hundreds
of feet if not miles above me.
But even that didn't
suffice to orient me.
I seriously wondered am
I alive or am I dead.
I couldn't make out.
And at one point I
thought, oh my God, I've
become a heroin addict myself.
I'm in some kind of mania of
sympathy and grief for Oliver's
death.
I have experimented
with drugs, and here I
am in some kind of overdose.
But I maintained a weird
clarity of mind at the same time
as though I was able to
observe from some position that
was undisturbed while the
rest of my entire reality
fell apart.
I felt at times as
though I was hearing
music for the first time.
It felt like the heartbeat
of reality itself.
And it can clear that
something like that
is the very essence of life.
That is to say life is
about trying to open oneself
in a kind of loving
acceptance and an engagement
or a pure openness
to experience.
That's the point rather
than fear and defense.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What remains if ego or
self dissolves completely?
What remains is this
sense of awareness,
the sense of witness, the
sense of awakenedness.
And so ego can dissolve
entirely, sense of self
can dissolve
entirely, and yet you
can be fully aware
that you're aware.
And there's something
sacred about that.
Some people might
describe it as a void.
Some people might describe
it as a white light.
But there's this state
of pure awareness,
and we're leaning deeply--
as deeply as we can--
into this existential
mystery of what
it is that we're doing here.
>> I changed my research
direction and my career really
because of something that
happened in the field with
my fish.
I was trained as a
marine scientist,
and I did most of
my early research
with coral reef fishes.
And then one day as part of my
experiment, I was in the water,
and after spending months with
these particular individuals,
which I knew personally I would
say as one-on-one relationship
built over the time, that they--
fish they just
until the day before
would come inside
my hands and I could
close my hands
around them and they
were like we know
this is just Monica.
She comes every day,
and it's all good.
That day nobody came
out, and the only thing
that was different that day
was that I went in the water
with the thought of
finishing my experiments
and collecting them
all, which obviously it
wasn't a good ending for them.
In that moment when
nobody came out
to greet me as they did for
days and days for months,
I just realized that this
fish knew about me much more
than I knew about me.
They showed me what
it really means
to have empathic relationships.
In that moment, I realized
that there are no boundaries
that we think we have our
private lives inside our minds,
but in reality we are
immersed in this ocean where
all boundaries are
quite fictitious.
The experience for me
changed my entire career
because I realized that there
was no questions that I could
ask that would be important
enough or special enough
to justify me taking
someone else's life.
That's when the plants came and
rescued the scientist in me.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We see the world as
separate from us,
and we see things, not beings.
And so the moment we appreciate
what consciousness really
is, this one big ocean
that expresses itself
through different
forms and shapes,
then as the plants have taught
me many times, what you see
is just you.
You wouldn't hurt yourself.
You wouldn't kill yourself.
You wouldn't destroy anything.
You wouldn't behave as
we do in our environment
because that is you, too.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I'm now a panpsychist.
So panpsychist comes from
the word pan, everywhere,
and psyche, soul, and
it's an ancient faith.
So many philosophers in
the Western tradition
have had it including Plato
and Spinoza and Schopenhauer.
But, of course,
it's very prevalent
if you look for it
in Buddhist faith
that many more creatures may
be in soul than we think.
Most people are willing to say
a monkey is conscious and maybe
a cat and a dog, but it peters
out very quickly after that.
But, mmm mmm,
squid probably not.
Bees haven't psyche.
They're just bugs.
But we really don't know.
The bee has a brain that's
roughly a million neurons far
smaller than us.
However, its complexity is
much denser, 10 times denser
than the neurons
in the human brain.
Many biologists, particularly
who think about consciousness,
believe it's an
emergent property.
The classical one
is wetness of water.
I can take a liquid
like water and it's wet.
I can pour it over my clothes,
and I know what wet is.
Now if I ask is one
molecule of H2O isn't wet,
doesn't have those properties
or two molecules of H2O,
so but at some point, if you
put enough molecules together,
they have this property wetness.
They cling to surfaces, and
they have tension, et cetera.
So people think, well, you
have one or two neurons,
you don't get consciousness.
Forty-two you don't.
But if you have a
billion, you get some,
and if you have 2
billion, you get more.
So it's just an
emergent property.
I used to think that.
But then consciousness is
just too radically different
from anything else I know.
Conscious experience,
subjectivity, feelings
are too radically different
from anything else
in the universe for me to
accept that it just emerges.
Max Planck, the father
of quantum physics,
said in the late '20s I regard
consciousness as fundamental.
I concur it's not something
first you're physics
and then if you
have enough physics,
then somehow you
get consciousness.
Consciousness is a fundamental
feature of the universe.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Does the fish know
that they're in water?
Do we really
recognize that we're
swimming in this sea of
consciousness all the time?
In our culture, often
that's not the case.
We're so caught up in
achievement and our own stories
and acquisition of
material objects
that define us that we
lose track of the fact
that we're afloat in this
sea of consciousness.
Psilocybin is one very powerful
doorway into that recognition.
Some people that
are already awake
to the vastness and the
wonder, but other people,
it's their first awakening to
a different way of experiencing
and being in the world.
>> It's not the drug.
The drug helps you
to open the door,
but the drug isn't
what's outside the door.
The question is how much
of reality you can take.
Ordinarily the function
of our mental apparatus
is to close down the
opening like closing down
the aperture of a camera
to the tightest, most
restrictive aperture so
that you're not flooded,
so you're not overwhelmed.
And psilocybin is
an aperture opener.
It massively exposes.
I felt like I was being
miraculously exposed
to my own life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I had enormously powerful
experiences visually
of what seemed to be
an immensity of space.
Then the experience would
reopen as if you're already
at the infinite,
and suddenly that
would open again to an
infinite beyond the infinite.
And that was the moment when the
astronaut metaphor came back,
and I thought, yeah.
Something like
exploration, something
like the pure
adventure of going out
was as open eyes as
possible to drink
in what is new and strange,
that's the whole purpose
and aim of our existence.
Consciousness is nothing
but this openness.
Traditionally we think of God
as the endpoint of the journey.
God is the destination, and it
suddenly rolls over me again,
no, God is not the destination.
God is the journey.
It's the openness
itself that is divine,
which then led me to
this massive realization
that God is seeing
through our eyes,
that God's on the adventure,
that God in a certain sense
is the ultimate
astronaut himself,
that without us seeing
these strange visions,
he doesn't get to see anything,
and without us feeling things,
he doesn't feel
anything without us
going through the
experiences of life.
He doesn't go through life.
In other words that we are the
proxies for God's own life.
And this was to me
so new, a perspective
that I was kind
of shocked by it.
And I realized if God
truly grants freedom,
he doesn't know the
outcome of those free acts.
He is on the adventure
more than anyone.
The gift of freedom
necessitates that God
is truly open to whatever's
going to come out.
And it also made me
realize, of course,
this is the only
possible meaning of love.
Love is such an
adventure of freedom
where you take the
risk of openness
to the other including
the possibility of being
disappointed, of being wounded.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In another rushing over
me of a revelation,
I thought of my son.
He came to me and
not just his presence
but a kind of electric,
vivid, intense presence.
I could not but imagine
it alive and imagine it
as his core being.
In his absence, in this ultimate
absence, I found him again.
It came to me to realize
that maybe in this sense
nothing ever dies.
His essence, his
distilled essence,
could survive death
at least in my heart.
That triggered
another whole wave
where I thought to
myself maybe this
is why this life is so filled
with failures and tragedies
and losses that love
requires these failures,
its own failures, its
own losses love perhaps,
in this very mysterious
way, requires death in order
to purify itself, which
at any of the time,
I would have regarded as a
completely crazy thought.
Or I would have regarded it
in another time and place
as a kind of not just silly
religious thought but maybe
almost a despicable thought,
a making light of what
is terrible and tragic, sugar
coating it and making it
appear acceptable
what isn't acceptable.
>> For me, the work with
psychedelic plants is a moment
of communion with the infinite
just the same as maybe
the poets would have
written about it forever.
Anybody who has had
those experiences
know exactly what they are,
and they touch our soul
so deeply that the mind has
no chance to try to explain.
The heart is listening, and
the heart already knows.
When we're having these mystical
experiences, whether it's
through meditation or
psychoactive plants or yoga,
the place that we are
touching is always the same
because there is
only one place here.
That's what I would
call consciousness.
It's not a thing.
It's a space.
And that's where we
go when we allow it.
I think this ability
to directly connect
with this universal
consciousness, whatever
we want to call it, God.
It's actually not a
special thing but is--
it's our heritage.
It's not something that only
some people can achieve.
It's our heritage
as human beings,
and it's again just
a matter of choices.
But it's-- we are all the same.
We have-- we are
made of the same.
We come from the same.
We are the same.
And so we all have exactly
the same opportunity
for the same choices
if we wanted to.
Which is, of course, compared to
what the religious system would
offer.
It would be exactly
the opposite someone
has the control of your
experience of yourself as God.
I had dreams in my home
in Australia pointing
to specific places and people.
Then I went and looked
for them, and that's
how I ended up working
with an elder who
taught me a lot about
the plants that he
uses to heal his people.
[CHATTER]
I travel to this very
remote area of Mexico
to learn from the
Huicholes because they
are such an ancient culture and
their entire culture is founded
and closely related to one
psychedelic plant, the peyote.
The relationship with this
plant seems fundamental for them
to survive in these remote
regions, not just physically
but also spiritually, and
find the direct connection
to their divine essence.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And now I had to
deal with my conflict.
I see a stressed
animal that knows
exactly what is going to happen,
and I actually really hope
he is going to fight.
And it's actually
interesting because just
like in our society,
I don't feel
I have a choice that I can stand
just on my own and stop this.
It's going to happen regardless.
And I have to let it happen, and
this is where my conflict is.
Under all of these
layers, I'm actually
wearing a t-shirt that says
tread lightly, eat kindly.
It's like this is seriously a
really funny joke from life.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[LOWING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There's a Buddhist thing
which I think physicists will
agree that a million cores
cannot bring to existence
something that does not exist
in any way out of nothing.
There's always a past formation.
So according to Buddhist
way of seeing things,
the stream, the continuum
of consciousness
can only begin
less and end less.
Now what will happen when
we die, the atoms of my body
will disintegrate, but they
are not going to disappear.
So similarly the
stream of consciousness
made of moment of
consciousness being
a continuum, unbroken continuum,
but without entity traveling,
me.
I'm traveling there.
The young mature not
become the old mature,
I'm going to die, maybe
reincarnate in a little cow.
So but something is still mature
in that cow and all of that.
So that's Buddhism.
It doesn't accept death.
There is no self.
Be autonomous and
permanent that travels
along the consciousness.
There's just the
successions of moments
that is never interrupted.
It's like a stream, the
Mississippi River, the Rhine
River.
There's no something,
a core, that is really
the essence of the Rhine River.
It's just the endless
succession of flow of the river
that you call Rhine and
rightly so because it's
not the same as the Ganges.
>> If we see consciousness
just as this ocean,
then my essence as me right now
is just a part of that ocean,
and in that sense,
I will continue.
I don't die because
I'm already everything
as it is concentrated
into this little drop.
If I do see myself as
separate from the ocean,
then I will die.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This question about
the nature of awareness,
the nature of this sense
of the interconnectedness
and the sacredness of that,
this is not going to be answered
in my lifetime.
It's not going to be answered
in my grandchild's lifetime.
This is a much deeper question.
It may never be answerable.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
But, boy, do I love
contemplating that,
do I love studying
that, and I think
that deeper
understanding of that
has very profound implications
for how we're going to end up
treating one another
and how we're
going to survive as a species.
>> This mechanistic
view is dying,
and we really need to move
into a more unifying view.
And inevitably I think the
message is always the same.
It's like just
remember that you are
part of this, and your delusion
that you're separate from this,
it's just that an illusion.
And actually I think
what is really beautiful
about it is that
that longing, that
feeling of aloneness that most
of us carry, in those moments
just really disappears
because you're not alone.
You never were, and you are--
you cannot be alone.
[MUSIC PLAYING]